The Obnoxiously Gay Come for Abilene Christian University
This is precisely the same play we’ve seen run again and again.

Afew columns ago, I addressed the subject of what it takes for one to be “obnoxiously gay,” a description that I applied to Secretary of Transportation Pete Buttigieg in my 2022 book The Revivalist Manifesto, which recently returned to public attention thanks to CNN’s using it as fuel for a hit piece on House Speaker Mike Johnson, who wrote the book’s foreword.

I asked this about Buttigieg and what it is to be obnoxiously gay:

Here’s something to ponder: If Pete Buttigieg is not obnoxiously gay, then which of the following are true?:

It’s impossible for anyone in modern America to be obnoxiously gay;
It’s possible for someone to be obnoxiously gay, but you aren’t allowed to notice; or
There is a threshold for being obnoxiously gay that Pete Buttigieg has yet to meet.
That returned to mind this week when a coalition of the obnoxiously gay and their sycophants decided to prey upon Abilene Christian University, a small private college in West Texas that is serious about educating students with a Biblical worldview in ways that Pete Buttigieg would not approve of:

Abilene Christian University is revisiting its sexuality policy after over 2,000 students, alumni and friends of the university voiced concerns about Holy Sexuality Week, a school event on relationships and sexuality some claimed included one-sided, exclusionary messages about LGBTQ people.

“You gave a public platform to people who denied the lived reality of LGBTQ+ Christians, claimed inaccurately that homosexuality lacks a genetic basis, and made the ludicrous and hateful statement that ‘the opposite of homosexuality is holiness,’” said a Nov. 16 letter written by Wildcats for Inclusion, a new alumni group formed in the wake of Holy Sexuality Week.

In an email to the group, university President Phil Schubert said the board of trustees plans to review the school’s “Sexual Stewardship Policy” in January. But in an interview with Religion News Service, Schubert said that while he can’t speak for the board, he doesn’t expect the policy to change, largely because the board dedicated extensive time to researching, praying over and developing its policy in 2017.

That policy calls for “chastity outside of marriage between a man and a woman” and for the university “to create an inclusive environment for all students — even those who disagree with ACU’s beliefs — so long as they refrain from sexual activity outside of marriage between a man and woman.”

“We don’t have a neutral position on this,” Schubert said in response to concerns about one-sided messaging at the event. “We’re a faith-based institution of higher learning that is governed by a board of trustees that is deeply faith committed. And so they’ve chosen to provide some guidance on this. So I understand that some would like there to be equal representation of affirming and traditional views of marriage, but that’s not where the university sits today. And it’s not what we feel is the responsibility we have to teach and mentor students according to what we believe the Bible instructs.”

Who are the 2,000? The guess here, and it’s certain to be an accurate guess, is that they’re a whole lot more “friends” of ACU than actual students or alumni.

By the way, since when is homosexuality genetic? It would seem that if ever a “gay gene” had been isolated during the largely complete project of mapping the human genome, that news would have gotten out. And yet this group seems to have some secret proof denied to the rest of us, including President Schubert and the board.

If you aren’t serious about the things Abilene Christian University teaches, you’re highly unlikely to be a student or alumnus of Abilene Christian University (and you shouldn’t be). This isn’t MIT, Stanford, or Pepperdine, nor is it the University of Alabama, Tulane, or the Colorado School of Mines. There are very few external things going on around that school that would attract people who couldn’t care less about the Christian faith ACU brings to its educational mission. Abilene, Texas, lacks beautiful beaches, great snowskiing, a French Quarter, or SEC football, though the university’s basketball team did make a nice NCAA Tournament run a couple of years back.

Meaning this is precisely the same play we’ve seen run again and again by the obnoxiously gay. This is the same pressure campaign they bring against the Christian bakers, florists, wedding planners, and others who refuse to service gay weddings and trans “gender reveals” out of allegiance to their faith. Finding a florist willing to decorate a gay wedding is painfully easy to do, and yet the obnoxiously gay will seek out those conscientious objectors in the culture war and demand they be conscripted for frontline action.

With a penalty of millions of dollars in legal defense fees for those who stand against the obnoxiously gay.

We can all agree this is obnoxiously gay, can we not? It’s certainly more consequential than P-Butt’s protestations that he was more Christian than the Christians who criticized his lifestyle as running afoul of Scripture, and without question it’s more acute than those photos of Buttigieg and his husband in a “birthing bed” with their adopted children — as Buttigieg was taking a leave of absence from his job running the Department of Transportation in the middle of a supply chain crisis.

They’re attempting to cancel, or corrupt, a Christian university for taking the position that sex is for procreation — a position the Bible is hardly unclear on — on the grounds that this is discriminatory to people who practice sodomy.

That’s a direct — call me crazy, but I’d say it’s obnoxious, and I don’t think I’m wrong — attack on the First Amendment right of ACU’s board to practice its freedom of religion, association, and expression.

And if you’ll permit me to note it, this is something else — the war on faith — that I give a full exposition to in Racism, Revenge and Ruin: It’s All Obama, my new book that makes a splendid Christmas gift for you and yours (it’s available at Amazon in hardcover and Kindle format now). Prior to Barack Obama’s political rise, a case like the one currently unfolding at Abilene Christian would have been almost unthinkable; 16 years later, it’s drearily viewed as inevitable. But after the Hobby Lobby and Little Sisters of the Poor cases, where Obama’s Justice Department goons attacked Christian businesses and religious organizations for objecting to Obamacare’s demands that they pay for abortifacient pills in their company health plans, the traditional American worldview is now subversive and dangerous and highly disfavorable.

At least ACU isn’t running a Latin mass on campus. If they were, the Obama redux administration of Joe Biden would surely send in the FBI to have a look around.

I’m also reminded of a Michelle Obama quote from back in February of 2008 that is depressingly appropriate here:

Barack Obama will require you to work. He is going to demand that you shed your cynicism. That you put down your divisions. That you come out of your isolation, that you move out of your comfort zones. That you push yourselves to be better. And that you engage. Barack will never allow you to go back to your lives as usual, uninvolved, uninformed.

Much of that isn’t true — the Obamas have spent the last 16 years attempting to maximize the uninformed among the American people, particularly when it comes to the things they were doing to this country. But the quote was certainly a harbinger of the most important aspect of Obama’s America — relentless, hyperaggressive cultural and political agitation against traditional Americans.

Which has become the national state of being, as the Christians of Abilene are experiencing today.

From the looks of it, the obnoxiously gay have met their match in President Schubert and his board. They’re going to need our support, though, because once these people go on the attack, they rarely, if ever, give up until they’ve destroyed their targets.
