Jan. 6 Trump Trial Still on Track Despite Supreme Court Intervention

It has been a busy week at the United States Supreme Court for Donald Trump’s fate. First, on Monday the justices agreed to decide on an expedited basis whether or not they will address the question of his immunity from criminal prosecution in the Jan. 6 case. Then, on Wednesday, they accepted a case from another Jan. 6 defendant that could knock out two of the four counts under which Trump was charged. Although both cases pose potential risks to special counsel Jack Smith, we think both should ultimately be resolved in the government’s favor—and without undue delay to Trump’s prosecution.

On the question of presidential immunity, Judge Tanya Chutkan had ruled decisively against Trump, holding that there is no absolute presidential criminal immunity. But, in the wake of that blow, Trump was given a small victory, as Chutkan temporarily stayed most of the district court proceedings pending the resolution of Trump’s immunity appeal.

Under Supreme Court precedent, when there is an interlocutory appeal (an immediate appeal before there has been final judgment in a case), the district court loses jurisdiction and therefore control over the aspects of a case that are involved in that appeal. When the appeal concerns whether the litigation itself can go forward at all, the lower court must stay proceedings, since it would be unfair to subject a defendant to processes to which he would be immune. Chutkan recognized that if the appellate court found that Trump does have absolute presidential immunity, he would be protected from facing trial or any of the other risks of litigation. Therefore, she entered a stay for most parts of the case.

Trump will still have to comply with the gag order, his terms of parole, and the order protecting discovery. And the government will likely still voluntarily go through with its obligations under the already-scheduled filing deadlines, as it indicated in its filing on Trump’s stay motion. But Trump will not have to respond, and the judge presumably won’t consider them until the stay is lifted. However, Chutkan expressly noted that she retains the ability—if Trump’s appeals are rejected and she regains jurisdiction—to keep any of the dates for future deadlines and proceedings, including the March 4 trial date.

The problem for Trump is that this is at best a temporary victory. We think he will ultimately lose his presidential immunity appeal because, as we have arguedbefore, such presidential protection would be antithetical to the Constitution, our laws, and the nation’s foundational democratic principles. Moreover, Jack Smith has cleverly pushed the issue to the Supreme Court—which is likely to speed up the winding appellate process Trump was counting on to delay the trial past the November 2024 election. The high court seems inclined to take the case, and to do so on an expedited basis. That is suggested by the fact that the court has already ordered briefing by next Wednesday, Dec. 20, on whether they will take up the immunity question.

Were the Supreme Court to continue to move quickly, it would be acting consistently with its own precedent. In U.S. v. Nixon, the court similarly recognized the urgency of resolving a similarly pressing criminal matter, of grave public importance, concerning a president—and did so on an expedited basis, within two months.

But even if the Supreme Court doesn’t afford expedited relief, the case is separately still moving forward in the D.C. Circuit, which has already granted Smith’s motion to expedite the immunity appeal. Briefing must be complete by Jan. 2, and we anticipate oral argument and a decision not long after that. That means the case will likely be back in the Supreme Court in January even if the justices choose not to leapfrog the appellate process and take it up now.

The bottom line is that the immunity appeal could still lead to some delay, but it should not be significant enough to push the completion of the trial past the 2024 election. While nobody knows for sure, we’re likely looking at a delay of 60 to 90 days, which means a trial starting in May or June. With the case estimated to take eight to 12 weeks, that is sufficient time to wrap things up before the November election.

But will all four counts remain, or will the Supreme Court eliminate the obstruction of Congress ones? On Wednesday, the Supreme Court also agreed to consider an appeal from alleged Jan. 6 insurrectionist Joseph Fischer that will decide the applicability of the relevant statue to Jan. 6 cases, potentially including that of the former president. The D.C. Circuit has already ruled that the obstruction statute is lawful and applies to the Jan. 6 cases. We think the Supreme Court should ultimately uphold that decision, and in a way that also does not bring undue delay to the trial of the former president.

The dispute the Supreme Court will review centers on 18 USC 1512(c), which provides criminal penalties for

Whoever corruptly—

(1) alters, destroys, mutilates, or conceals a record, document, or other object, or attempts to do so, with the intent to impair the object’s integrity or availability for use in an official proceeding; or

(2) otherwise obstructs, influences, or impedes any official proceeding, or attempts to do so,

The case centers around whether or not (c)(2) applies only to document destruction and evidence tampering specifically. That is Fischer’s contention, which would mean that his alleged efforts to obstruct Congress on Jan. 6 fell outside the statute, together with the actions of hundreds of other Jan. 6 rioters and possibly those of Trump.

The alternative position is that (c)(2) also captures other forms of obstructing official proceedings, even if no document or evidence spoliation was involved. That is the government’s position, and sweeps in Fischer and others whose Jan. 6 conduct disrupted Congress. This view prevailed in the D.C. Circuit and also encompasses Trump’s disruptive conduct.

This is a nuanced case—far more so, in our opinion, than the immunity appeal—but we think the Supreme Court should adopt the government’s position, which was relied upon by the D.C. Circuit. Fischer’s reading of the statute is strained, and DOJ’s is more in accord with the plain language Congress enacted. That’s one of the reasons that all other circuit courts and at least 14 other D.C. District Court judges that have considered the issue agreed with the DOJ position.

In our view, the D.C. Circuit’s reliance on the word “otherwise,” which is how 1512(c)(2) begins, is correct in including conduct outside the scope of the spoliation provision. Moreover, other related legal provisions also include the same structure of specific prohibitions and catch-all clauses—so it is logical to read 1512(c) the same way.

Under this analysis, the charges against Trump would be unaffected. But even if the Supreme Court went against the government, the court’s ruling might still be construed so that Smith’s charges under 1512(c) would still stand. For example, it could be argued that the false electoral certificates that Trump allegedly procured as part of his alleged scheme to interfere with Congress on Jan. 6 are a document-falsification form of obstruction.

Beyond the merits, the effect of this appeal on the timing of the Trump trial should be limited. Unlike the immunity appeal, there is no legal mechanism forcing the judge to delay anything in the lower court to account for the obstruction-statute appeal. She can simply apply the law as the D.C. Circuit (and many other judges on her court and elsewhere) found it. At any rate, the Supreme Court will resolve this question before it concludes this term in June. If we are right about the likely 60-to-90-day delay of the March 4 trial date, Chutkan will know how to instruct the jury well before the trial concludes at some point before the end of the summer.

The stage is set for a potentially consequential Supreme Court term, with the justices poised to expeditiously rule on the scope of presidential immunity, and the lawfulness of DOJ’s insurrection prosecutions. But Donald Trump should not expect a saving grace in black robes—and will likely still appear for trial in a D.C. federal courthouse in 2024 as a criminal defendant.
