Pelosi Gets Biden an Impeachment Inquiry
Alan Dershowitz’s warning that Trump’s impeachment could backfire was ignored.

Alan Dershowitz, the famed Harvard Law professor emeritus — a Democrat and non-Trump voter who, out of his support for the Constitution, served as Donald Trump’s lawyer in the then-president’s impeachment — had this warning for Democrats in that day of the Trump impeachments. 

Dershowitz’s warning was headlined this way in 2019 at BPR Business & Politics: 

Alan Dershowitz: Next Dem president will be impeached, thanks to party’s reckless precedent

The story reported this (bold print for emphasis supplied): 

Harvard Law professor Alan Dershowitz said the next Democratic president will be impeached, thanks to the dangerous and reckless precedent the Democratic Party is setting with its sham impeachment.

Accordingly, impeaching Trump would set into motion a dangerous slippery slope that will come back to bite the Democrats in the butt the next time a Democrat is elected president.

“They have created open-ended criteria which bear no relationship to the words of the Constitution itself,” Dershowitz told Fox News host Mark Levin. “If President Trump is impeached, it will set a terrible precedent which will weaponize impeachment.”

“So the next Democrat who gets elected will be impeached because [Republicans will] find an ‘abuse of power.’ It’s hard to find any president that can’t be accused of abuse of power.”

And who was the driving force behind Trump’s impeachment? The person who blithely ignored Dershowitz’s warning.

That would, of course, be then-House Speaker Nancy Pelosi. Indeed, Democrat Pelosi would persist in impeaching Trump not just once — but twice.

And now?

Now the Pelosi impeach-Trump chickens have come home to roost for a Democrat president … precisely as Dershowitz predicted. 

This week comes the headline that Dershowitz warned Democrats about in 2019:

House Republicans formalize impeachment inquiry into President Biden 

ABC News reports: 

House Republicans on Wednesday passed a resolution formalizing their ongoing impeachment inquiry into President Joe Biden.

What should be most concerning for Democrats is that this Biden impeachment inquiry, combined with the already ongoing investigations being run by House Judiciary Chairman Jim Jordan (R-OH) and House Oversight Committee Chairman Jim Comer (R-KY), is going to unmask the Biden family influence-peddling business that has used the “Biden brand” to make millions.

Which is to say, the Trump impeachments targeted the former president’s behavior in a single phone call to the Ukrainian president or on a single day, Jan. 6. There was nothing there beyond that — and Trump supporters argued there was nothing there in the first place.

But the Biden impeachment inquiry is a whole other situation. In the words of Chairman Comer: 

We have established in the first phase of this investigation where this money has come from: Ukraine, Romania, Russia, Kazakhstan, China, it didn’t come from selling anything legitimate…it was funneled through shell companies and third parties to hide the Biden’s fingerprints. This deserves investigation, this deserves accountability, the American people expect this Committee to investigate public corruption…the witnesses today have all identified the evidence the Committee has uncovered as deserving further inquiry. And that is what this Committee will do, no matter where the evidence leads.

Would this impeachment inquiry have been if Pelosi had never taken House Democrats down the impeach-Trump path? There’s no way to say for sure. But precisely as Dershowitz is in essence saying, no rocket science is necessary to understand that what Democrats did at Pelosi’s insistence was bound to backfire on the next Democrat in the White House.

Now, that backfire is happening. And the Biden White House has Nancy Pelosi to thank.

Well done, Democrats. Well done.
